MASTER CORRUPT:
> Master is the most crucial database in an instance, if it is corrupt entire instance gets affected.
Master Corrupt
Error number: 3411
Error Message: Timely fashion error
112 error number for disk space

Partially corrupt:
1. If master database is corrupt, it is either completely corrupt or partially corrupt. If partially
corrupt, instance will start with -m;-t3608 and if it is completely corrupt instance wouldn't start.
2. Put your instance in single user mode.
3. Restore master database WITH REPLACE option

Restore database master from disk=N'F:\Master.bak' WITH REPLACE

Completely Corrupt:
1) Master database doesn't start with /m /t3608 and hence we need to rebuild the master
database.
Use command prompt and start rebuilding master database by enter into path of setup.exe
[Path of SQL Server software]
2) Rebuild master
Start /wait setup.exe /qb INSTANCENAME=sql2005 REINSTALL=SQL_Engine
REBUILDDATABASE=1 SAPWD=Admin123

Net stop "SQL Server (instance name)"
Net start "SQL Server (instance name)" /m
4) Restore master database WITH REPLACE option
Restore database master from disk=N'F:\Master.bak' WITH REPLACE


MODEL CORRUPTION:
Error: 5172, Severity: 16, State: 15.
Error message:
The header for file '\model.mdf' is not a valid database file header.
Solution:
Model database being one of the crucial database for new database creations and also for
Tempdb recreation on every restart.
If model database is corrupt it is going to affect instance functionality.


Steps:
1) Verify if Model is corrupt or not in Event viewer and SQL Server Error Logs.
2) Confirm if a valid database backup exists or not using restore verify only/header only.
3) Start instance with Master database only by enabling the trace 3608.
Net start "SQL Server (MSSQLSERVER)" /t3608
4) Restore the Model database from backup.
Restore database model from disk=N'F:\Model.bak' WITH REPLACE
5) Start instance normally by removing trace 3608
Net stop "SQL Server (MSSQLSERVER)"
Net start "SQL Server (MSSQLSERVER)"


OTHER METHOD: Copy and paste model .mdf, .ndf files from other instance [Required to take
instance offline]


MSDB CORRUPT:
1) Verify the reason of failure in the error logs and troubleshoot accordingly. If database is really
corrupt then look out for an available valid backup. If backup is available restore MSDB as a
normal user database and it would be restored.
2) If backup is not available, then stop the instance and start the instance in /m and /t3608
startup parameters.
Net stop "SQL Server (MSSQLSERVER)"
Net start "SQL Server (instance name)" /t3608 /m
3) Connect to the Query window and detach MSDB database and delete the OS level files.

SP_detach_db 'MSDB'
NOTE: Remove MSDB data/log files from the path.
4) Execute the script in %Root Directory%\Install\instMSDB.sql file.
ISSUE:::: after msdb rebuild then Sql server agent not able to start? How to resolve
Solution:
sp_configure 'show advanced options', 1;
RECONFIGURE;
sp_configure 'Agent XPs', 0;
RECONFIGURE;



TEMPDB CORRUPTION:
1. If Tempdb corrupt instance wouldn't respond and it would be in hung state equal to crash.
2. To resolve, restart Sql server instance so that Tempdb files will be recreated.
Error number: 824 state: 19
Note:
1. If Tempdb log file is full then SQL Server instance did not allow any connections.
2. If model database is corrupted at the same time Tempdb corrupt, then even Tempdb did not
create after restart.
Trace Flags:
-t: refereing startup
-d: fully qualified path of data file
-e: error file
-l: log file
-c: quick start of instance than regular process
-m: single user mode
-s: sqlserver.exe
-n: start instance name then the information will not trace in event viewer


Trace Flag 3607:
Starts SQL Server without recovering any databases

Trace Flag 3608:
Starts SQL Server, recovering master only

User Database Status -32768:
Starts SQL Server without recovering the user database.
